3-2-1 EAT


Watermelon contest is juicy, sticky, seed-spittin' fun

4-H leader: Event features best "eaters" in county

By Lori Henson/Tribune-Star

July 8, 2003

There is no precision in winning a watermelon-eating contest.

Contestants -- reckless youth, enchanted adults -- all with eyes toward the crowd, assume the stance: bent knees, out-thrusted elbows and a firm, if soggy, grip on the rind-cradled melon.

"You're seeing the finest watermelon eaters in the entire county -- possibly the entire state," says 4-H leader and event organizer Mary Ann Sedletzeck, lending gravity to the championship round Monday evening.

And with a "3-2-1 -- Eat!" from the crowd, the front lawn of the 4-H building at the Wabash Valley Fairgrounds is pummeled with fat pink chunks of melon and a downpour of liquid from mouths runneth over.

In a matter of seconds, round after round, a hand clutching a rind is thrust into the air by a drippy elbow. It is fruit-spewing victory, sticky and sweet.

"This is what they're going to remember when they grow up," says Sedletzeck, a kindergarten teacher raised in a 4-H family.

For some champions, devouring watermelon seems second-nature.

"I didn't have no practice," says 7-year-old Layne Curley, her chin stained pink beneath brown-freckled cheeks. Curley, whose 4-H projects include gardening, flowers and foods, took the top prize in the "Girls, 10 and under" round.

The younger boys champion, Wyatt Sowards, 10, -- who is showing a horse and a dog at the fair -- gives a more in-depth, post-round wrap-up.

"I did my teeth-scraper," he says. "It works with cantaloupe."

Layne's sister, Hanna, "11-and-a-half" and a champion in the older girls category, offers the perspective of age.

"I just went side to side and took big bites," she says.

Big bites are necessary as the competition heats up in the older boys round. In a last-second change, two contestants' pieces of watermelon are swapped out because the wedges are "wimpy."

"Now, we're really going to have to watch, because it's really competitive," says Sedletzeck, instructing the judges.

In a fraction of the earlier rounds' duration, Will Anderson, 12, hoists his gutted rind in the air and is able to speak, "watermelon," one of the rules of the contest.

"Wow, that is a world record," Sedletzeck supposes.

Anderson has tasted such victory before, when he was the 2001 champion. His secret?

"I smash it -- rub it against my teeth," he says, a morsel of watermelon having just fallen from his cheek.

Will's mom, Diane Anderson, defends the family title as the women's champion.

"I'm crazy," she says.

But the Sowards forge a legacy, as well, as Wyatt's dad, Dale, takes the men's title. His wife says he doesn't even like watermelon.

But the champion to beat all is Becky Lynn, 15, of Riley, who takes the championship round before running to a trash barrel to spit out a mouthful of fruit. She is a humble champion.

"It's just for the fun," says Lynn

, who will show chickens, rabbits and sheep at 4-H shows.

What follows the hasty burrowing into a watermelon rind is a more exact exercise -- spitting the seeds.

Eating contestants line up before a white plastic sheet that bears markings of progressive encouragement -- "He-man," "Way to Go!," "Record-Setter," and so on.

With a couple of seeds from the previous competition stuck to their palms, each spitter gets two shots. Qualifying seeds must hit the plastic, so wind resistance is to be heeded.

Charlene McKean, an organizer along with Sedletzeck, chooses the rolled-tongue spit with little success.

Bethany Wenzel, 14, shoots an estimated 28-footer to take second place. But the spitting champion is a Lafayette 12-year-old who is helping his cousin show rabbits at the fair. With a 30-foot threat to the Indiana State Fair record, Dustin Wallace's seed hit near the end of the mat, meeting awe from onlookers.

His winning tactic, he says is something unseen in the entire evening's competition: "Spit dry."

Lori Henson can be reached at (812) 231-4254 or lori.henson@tribstar.com.






























